---
title: "Defer"
last_modified_at: 2023-10-01T15:26:02+10:00
excerpt: "Why it's important to use defer for maintainability and in the presence of panics.  I also look at some common pitfalls."
toc: true
toc_sticky: true
categories: [language,statements,defer]
tags: [defer,panic,recover]
header:
  overlay_image: "/assets/images/defer.jpg"
  overlay_filter: 0.5
permalink: /blog/defer.html
---

**Defer** is another of Go's unique features.  In this post I look at how and why to use it, how it interacts with `return` and `panic` and a few potential pitfalls.

Not freeing resources is a bug that can easily go undetected since the consequences are not always, or not at all, obvious.  This problem has been tackled in other languages (as I discuss in the [Background](#background) section below) but Go's solution is by far the best I have seen.  (It's also another **great** example of what I call [DIRE](https://devmethodologies.blogspot.com/2014/04/dire.html).

# Background

<!--****************************-->
<details markdown="1">
<summary>General</summary>
<br/>
**C**

C programs are notorious for having resource leaks.  After decades of using C I came to be pretty good at remembering to add code to clean up after myself, including writing assertions and tests to check these things.  However, I am sure every C programmer (including me) have at some point written code that would leak something (memory, window resource, ...) for some error(s) - especially error conditions without unit tests.

Disregarding that, even the most diligent programmer cannot protect their code from future changes. For example, an early return from a function might be added which forgets to close a file handle.

You have probably seen this sort of thing when using an editor: you can't understand why the OS won't let you delete a file since you had already closed the file in your favourite editor.  However, once you shut down the editor completely, you *can* delete the file.  The editor (probably written in C :) had omitted to close the file handle.

C programmers adopt various strategies to mitigate this problem.  One set of "coding standards" I was forced to work with insisted that all functions have one exit point (at the end).  This made it easier to check that resources were freed (and had other advantages like setting breakpoints in the debugger) but it does cause less readable and more complicated code.

It's difficult, in C, to ensure that everything is cleaned up in all code paths.  It's _impossible_ to ensure that future modifications do the same.

**C++**

In C++ things are a bit easier than C, since the language has constructors and destructors.  Wrapping the resource in an object you can allocate in the constructor and free it in the destructor. This was formalised by Bjarne Stroustrup with the acronym RAII (resource acquisition is initialization).

Like Go's `defer` this has the advantage that an early `return` or `panic` (`throw` in C++) cannot bypass the cleanup code.  It also has the important (DIRE) advantage that the allocate/de-allocate code can be kept together - assuming that the **destructor** is placed just after the constructor(s) as is conventionally done.

**Java**

Java and C# have the closest thing that I have seen to Go's `defer`. A `finally` block of code after a `try` statement can be used to ensure that code cannot be bypassed using an early `return` or `throw`. (Note that this operates at the `try` statement level, not the function level as in Go.)

Since you must use `try` to use `finally` many Java developers think this is only for use with **exceptions**, but it can actually be used even in the absence of exceptions.

The only problem with `finally` is that the "deallocate" code becomes separated from the "allocate" code by the body of the `try` statement, with [DIRE](https://devmethodologies.blogspot.com/2014/04/dire.html) consequences.

---
</details>
<!--****************************-->
<details markdown="1">
<summary>Go</summary>
<br/>

**Basics of `defer`**

As already mentioned Go's `defer` mechanism is great for ensuring that resources are freed.  But it also has some interesting interactions with other parts of the Go language, like `panic` and `recover`.  I'll look at these, and other nuances, later, assuming you already know these basics:

* `defer` applies at the function not statement level
* `func`s are (obviously) run in reverse order they were deferred
* deferred functions are called even if the function panics
* deferred functions are invoked _after_ the return statement has been executed
* `panic`s may only be `recover()`ed inside a deferred `func`

**RAII vs Go's Recover**

Not being an OO language, Go cannot use RAII because there are no destructors.  (Go does have finalizers but these are of no use for RAII since they are only called when the object's memory is freed, which can be _much_ later.)

Luckily, Go has full support for functional programming, which allowed the simple solution of the `defer` statement.  I find `defer` somehow simpler and more flexible,

**Exceptions vs Go's Panic

In Go `panic` is the analogue of `throw` in other languages.  However, catching an "exception" (using `recover`) is different - you can only recover from `panic` in a deferred function.  At first, this seemed to me like an unnecessary complication but seems to avoid a lot of problems I had in C++ such as exceptions being thrown from inside a destructor which is being called in the context of an exception.

---
</details>
<!--****************************-->
<br/>

A lot has been written on `defer` in other fine blogs such as [Demystifying 'defer'](https://bitfieldconsulting.com/golang/defer) so I won't go over the basics.  (If you don't know what I mean by _basics_ then see the above **Background -> Go** section.)

# Always Use Defer

My first rule is **always use defer**.  It is often tempting **not** do so.  For example:

```go
func (d *Destination) Close(name string) {
    d.mu.Lock()
    if !d.closed {
        d.connection.Close()
        d.closed = true
    }
    d.mu.Unlock() // NOT recommended (for 2 reasons)
}
```

I have seen a **lot** of code written like this.  So what is wrong with it? What if someone decides to refactor the code like this:

```go
func (d *Destination) Close(name string) {
    d.mu.Lock()
    if d.closed {
        return
    }
    d.connection.Close()
    d.closed = true
    d.mu.Unlock()
}
```

Now the **mutex will not be unlocked** if the connection has already been closed.  This is a simple example, but these sorts of things happen in realistic code.

**But** there is a further problem with the original example. It will also **not** unlock the mutex if `d.connection.Close()` panics.  Then if another attempt is made to close (or do something else with `d`) the goroutine that calls `d.mu.Lock()` will block and possibly deadlock everything.

So that's two good reasons to **always** use `defer`.

```go
func (d *Destination) Close(name string) {
    d.mu.Lock()
    defer d.mu.Unlock()
    if !d.closed {
        d.connection.Close()
        d.closed = true
    }
}
```
<br/>

## Function Split

Here's another scenario... Sometimes you may be deep in a function, such as a `for` loop or `switch` and need to allocate and release some resource.  The resource has to be released immediately, instead of when the function returns.

It would be tedious to split off a tiny piece of code into a separate function.

Here's a slight variation on the previous example.  This time `Close()` requires some extra, time-consuming, code at the end.  You don't want to delay unlocking the mutex until `d.SomethingElse()` has finished, so you can't use `defer`.

```go
func (d *Destination) Close(name string) {
    d.mu.Lock()
    d.connection.Close()
    d.mu.Unlock()
	
   d.SomethingElse()  // time-consuming code
}
```

This has the same problems as mentioned above, but is fixed fairly easily by adding a new named function or by using a function literal like this:

```go
func (d *Destination) Close(name string) {
    func() {
        d.mu.Lock()
        defer d.mu.Unlock()
        d.connection.Close()
    }()

    d.SomethingElse()
}
```

I don't know about you but my functions tend to become overly long.  Splitting off smaller functions to enable the use of `defer` is a good thing.
{: .notice--info}

# Defer and Panic

As you are aware, Go has "exceptions" much like the `throw`, `catch` mechanism of C++, Java, etc, but uses the keyword `panic` and the built-in function `recover()`.  This is tightly linked to `defer` since you can only call `recover()` with a deferred function.

`Recover` is easy to use in Go, once you understand it.  Here's a question from a recent quiz I gave at the [Sydney Go Meetup](https://www.meetup.com/golang-syd/events/294169772/).  This one catches people out if they are used to C++.

```go
func main() {
    defer func() {
        defer func() {
            fmt.Print(recover())
        }()
        fmt.Print(recover())
        panic("DEF")
    }()
    panic("ABC")
}

```
What does this print?  (Answer: below)

# Defer and Return

Another useful (if a little bit tricky) feature of Go is that deferred functions are executed after the function's `return` statement is executed.  This allows you to change the return values from within the deferred function, but **only if you use named return values**. 

TODO: close example

Just to check that you understand how this works here is another puzzle:

```go
package main

import "fmt"

func main() {
	fmt.Println(f(), g())
}

func f() int {
	var r int
	defer func() {
		r = 42
	}()
	return r
}

func g() (r int) {
	defer func() {
		r = 42
	}()
	return r
}
```

What does this print?  (Answer: below)

## The Close Mistake

A common mistake is to assume that closing a file does not have an error.

```go
func save(filename string) (err error) {
    if f, err := os.Create(filename); err != nil
        return err
    }
    defer f.Close()  // WARNING: ignores errors
	if _, err = f.Write(...
    ...
```

But `f.Close()` can return an error, since it can write buffered data to disk.  You need to check the error return value within the deferred `f.Close()`.  Since the function has a named return value you can set the error return from inside the deferred function.

```go
func save(filename string) (err error) {
    if f, err := os.Create(filename); err != nil
        return err
    }
    defer func() {
        err = f.Close()
    }()
    if _, err = f.Write(...
    ...
```

# When Are Arguments Evaluated?

One pitfall that often catches new gophers is the assumption that arguments are evaluated when the deferred function is called.  Here is another puzzle for you:

```go
func f(i int) {
    fmt.Println("value =", i)
}

func main() {
    a := 1
    defer f(a)
    a = 42
}
```

What does this print?  (Answer: below)

In order use the value at the time the deferred function is called you need to capture the value like this:

```go
func main() {
	a := 1
	defer func() {
		fmt.Println("value =", a) // value = 42  
	}()
	a = 42
}
```

# Returning a Deferred Function

Another pattern you may see is calling a function that returns a function to be deferred.  Here is an example:

```go
func g() func() {
	fmt.Println("In g")
	return func() {
		fmt.Println("In deferred func")
	}
}

func main(t *testing.T) {
	defer g()()
	fmt.Println("In main")
}
```

Which will print:

```
In g
In main
In deferred func
```
<br/>

# Conclusion

There's just one point to this post: **always use `defer`** when you need to clean-up or free resources.  Using `defer` will make your code robust to future changes and safe in the presence of (recovered) panics.

As we saw above this is true even in the simplest cases.  You might be tempted in more complex cases (where using `defer` necessitates creating a new function) to skip it.  You should take a little bit more time to refactor the code; this has the added benefit that it encourages smaller functions.

The **main thing I like about `defer`** is that you can put the code that frees a resource immediately after the code that allocates it.  This proximity makes it easier to understand and check what the code is doing.

## Puzzle Answers
ABCDEF<br/>

0 42<br/>

value = 1
